hi I'm Steve Clemens and I have a
question does Israel have an endgame for
the war in Gaza let's get to the bottom
line Israel has been pounding Gaza for
more than a month ever since the Hamas
surprise attack of October 7th resulting
in more than 1,400 Israelis killed and
another 200 taken hostage at this point
more than 10,000 Palestinians have been
killed by Israeli forces about half of
them children today the narrow strip has
been split in two and most of its 2.3
million civilians have been displaced by
the non-stop Israeli shelling the
humanitarian situation on the ground has
become dire food water medicine and fuel
shortages are reaching catastrophic
levels and the United Nations said more
of its Aid workers have been killed in
Gaza than in any period in the history
of the United Nations all of which
brings to mind the famous quote of
General David Petraeus from 20 years ago
when US forces were invading Iraq he
said tell me how this ends the death and
destruction continue but what's the
endgame for Israel today we're talking
to Congressman Seth Molton a Democrat
representing Massachusetts and a veteran
of the Marine Corps who served in the
Iraq War Congressman Molton thank you so
much for joining us look you serve po
terms in Iraq you know what war feels
like and sees you saw your friends die
you saw civilians die and you saw enemy
combatants die I'm just interested given
your experience of that what frame
should we be considering as we look
today at the crisis between Israel uh
and Hamas in Gaza well first of all
let's just acknowledge war is absolutely
horrific War should be avoided at all
costs and the worst part of war is when
innocent people die and innocent people
always die in war and we saw innocent
civil uh civilians in Israel massacred
barbarically by Hamas and now we're
seeing innocent civilians in Gaza killed
every day in Israeli air strikes this is
a horrible tragedy I think the important
context to look at this war though is
that this is not a force onforce War
like Russia versus Ukraine or the United
States versus Germany in World War II
this is a real counterinsurgency where
the fight is not just to defeat Hamas
for Israel the fight is also to win over
the population so that Hamas to win
their hearts and Minds you do have to
win their heart how is that going from
your you know early of a month into this
War I don't think it's going very well
to be candid and and look I look at this
from the perspective of I want Israel to
defeat Hamas I want Israel and
Palestinians to live I want Israel and
Palestine to have peace I want Israeli
citizens is Palestinian citizens to not
have to worry that uh they're going to
get killed in their sleep but to get
there I do think you have to defeat
terrorists but you can't recruit more
terrorists in the process and the number
one way to recruit teror to the cause is
to kill innocence well you wrote a very
powerful and interesting piece um of the
likes that I haven't read out there
about war and conflict relevant to the
Israeli Gaza crisis um in CNN.com I
highly recommend that people take a look
at that article but in it you talk about
mist's math tell us about that so
General Stanley mccristal famous
counterinsurgent um American General in
Afghanistan he talked about how there's
this what he calls Insurgent math and he
estimates the equation to be for every
one civilian that you kill you recruit
about 10 terrorists so in other words if
Israel every one civilian let's foke on
that one innocent person of whom
thousands have now been killed uh we
know because over half of the 10,000 are
children so innocent right there but
tell us how many insurgents are created
this is a problem so so Israel has a
math problem and it's measured in human
lives if they go in and they say we're g
to take out this one Hamas terrorist but
in the process they kill just one
civilian well by general mist's math
you've just recruited nine new or sorry
10 new Hamas terrorists to the cause
that means you recruited 10 you killed
one you're plus nine that's not moving
in the right direction if you want to
actually take out this terrorist
organization you as you kind of look at
your experience there and and it's
something that I I think you acknowledge
is very very different that the density
of buildings of people um wildly
different than a place that's like
stacked up with people like London today
it's like going through and trying to
find you know the bad folks amongst a
lot of good folks you how do you process
that and and I and I want to acknowledge
I was very taken with your comment that
you called in a bombing rate on a school
you you flattened a
school so it was a difficult decision to
make uh um but here's the context that
was so different than than Gaza we knew
that there were no civilians in in that
neighborhood to the best of our
knowledge all the civilians had
evacuated that's because we in many ways
conditioned the battlefield we made sure
that civilians had a way to get out uh
we went into this building uh where
Americans had already taken uh several
casualties and then my Marines my
platoon took casualties as well and I
was faced with this decision uh do I
continue fighting the stairs where
they're rolling grenades down at us or
do I pull the Marines out and drop a
bomb on the building to take care of the
threat the insurgence but also wreck a
school a school that we would have to
rebuild if we wanted to win back popular
support and I made the decision I said
this is not worth more Marine lives so I
Dropped a Bomb but then the tough work
started because after we finished the
fighting in NAA in 2004 we spent months
and months rebuilding the city
rebuilding the city so that we could
rebuild trust with the Iraqi people who
by the way much like the Palestinians
they didn't want to be living under
terrorists but they weren't sure they
could trust Americans we had to earn
that trust you you also cite General
Mattis and something he said which I
found really interesting he said I want
the military to be looked at as the
enemy's worst enemy but as the people's
as there there would be no better friend
that's right and I found it very
interesting to hear those we're not
talking in those terms right now we're
caught in Rage we're caught in Emotion
but even President Biden acknowledged
that rage the blindness of Rage can be a
bad place to start so I I'm just
interested in how you see through that
and how do you Orient a military to be
No Worse Enemy and no better friend well
this was our first Marine Division motto
but it wasn't our motto when we went
into Iraq when we went into Iraq we
didn't understand the consequences of of
killing civilians we tried to avoid it
because it's the right thing to do but
we were just trying to defeat the Iraqi
Army it took us years to appreciate to
realize that we were in a
counterinsurgency campaign where it was
just as important to win over the
civilian population as it was to defeat
uh the enemy so General mtis introduced
that motto to to tell every single
Marine uh that you had to prove every
single day that your enemies would find
no greater foe but at the same time if
you put your trust in us if you put your
trust the United States Marine Corps you
won't find a better friend that was
really important to this whole concept
of winning over the civilian population
and what struck me is that um we would
spend often much more time focused on
the no better friend part than on the No
Worse Enemy I mean we might spend days
uh rebuilding infrastructure uh working
with Iraqi politicians and then and then
we might spend a couple hours at night
going on a on a raid to take out a few
terrorists when I later worked for
General Petraeus it was the it was the
same thing he would agonize over
restoring power to parts of Baghdad in
fact he sent my small team of Marines
once on a mission into enemy-held
territory a place where Americans didn't
want to go for the sole purpose not of
taking out terrorists but of fixing a
power line because he knew it was so
important to win over the support of the
of the civilian population by showing
you could deliver Services you know I
just went back and I sort of did a
search of news headlines of military
during the Iraq War during Afghanistan
and I found one um with this is a
someone you probably know uh who is the
the former head of us Central Command
Frank McKenzie who said a Cabo drone
strike that killed 10 civilians which
they thought was part of terrorist
infrastructure was a tragic mistake
children were killed and came out on
television admitted the mistake publicly
I have the article for that it may be
too early in this war to see that but
how much does confession apology
recognition of those mistakes publicly
fit into the hearts and Minds strategy
it's a good question Steve I think it
matters a lot and and again I'm not
saying that we always got it right uh
the message I'm trying to send to to the
Israelis who have every right to defend
their country every right to defend
their civilian population every right to
take out terrorists just as we did after
911 the message I'm trying to send is
learn from our mistakes because in the
early days of Iraq and Afghanistan you
would never hear the US apologize for
civilian casualties but as we came to
appreciate how important it was to show
the civilian population that you can
trust us you can work with us we're a
better alternative to the terrorists as
we came to appreciate that we were much
more candid and open and honest and
transparent and part of that is being
willing to mistakes now now Seth
publicly you're out there on this but
you said in this time of conflict we
need to begin thinking about end games
you need to Envision other things you
need to think about hard and Minds I'm
just interested in how this is playing
with your constituents and also this
town you know how are are are you
getting criticized for this or are you
being applauded for your well I me first
of all I always get criticized pretty
much no matter what you say you're going
to get criticized but no I think uh in
many ways people realize that um that
what what I'm trying to do here is is
not just sort of find the middle ground
but but really stand on moral principle
because there are strong moral reasons
why we don't need to see innocent Li
uh upended or or ended in this conflict
but there are real military reasons as
well so you can be the staunchest
supporter of Israel and I am a staunch
supporter of Israel of the Israeli state
of Israel's fundamental right even
responsibility to defend its citizens
while also saying if I want Israel to
win this war they've got to be more
careful they've got to minimize civilian
casualties because that's what we
learned in Iraq and Afghanistan now the
president and his team that President
Biden has called for a pause a ceasefire
you've called for humanitarian corridors
you've called for various Dimensions to
try to give you know people who are
innocent and opportunity to escape this
hell uh that they're in right now um how
do you think that's going well look
there's a little bit of a battle over
words here uh a lot of people I get a
lot of calls in the office saying why
won't you support a ceasefire I mean
first of all Israel is not going to
agree to a ceasefire and if you just
they made that very clear they made that
very clear but you know the Secretary
General of the UN has called for a cease
fire lots of others have called for a
ceasefire the Arab world that was
normalizing in in large part with Israel
through the Abraham Accords has also
called for a ceasefire we have said we
understand Israel is not going to call
for ceasefire look also a lot of Arab
leaders really want Hamas taken out and
that's something that that may not
resonate with the Arab street but is a
reality in this complicated part uh part
of the world the Middle East uh but but
here here's the reality Israel is not
going to agree to a ceasefire and on top
of that a ceasefire really would Empower
samas all Hamas allow them time to
reconstitute uh so what we what we need
fundamentally is not a ceasefire or a
humanitarian pause both terms that
suggest we're going to take a break from
the fighting but then we're going to go
right back at it the way we've been
doing it no what we need is a civilian
evacuation that's fundamentally what we
need and that's another lesson that we
learned in Iraq and Afghanistan but the
lesson the civilians in in Palestine
have learned is once they evacuate they
don't get back in so that's one of the
big concerns if you talk to Palestinians
on the other side of the equation those
that have gone into Jordan others in
times of Crisis they can't get back into
uh lands they once had so what do we do
with that fear and and is there some
negotiation some deal that get civilian
evacuation but doesn't result in them
not being able to get back into Gaza um
into their homes no it's a great
question um and what we what we did uh
in fuia for example the second time
Marines went into fuia they had
evacuated about 90% of the civilians so
only 10% of the civilians in that entire
city were left uh when the Marines went
in went in everybody there was tied into
the to the to the they made the decision
to stay and fight and so the Marines
took them out part of that part of the
way we were able to facilitate that uh
civilian evacuation is by promising the
civilians the residents that they could
go go back that they would be able to
return so you have to have this plan you
have to be able to lay out your endgame
you talk to your Israeli friends and
folks that you've talked to in the US
government said that's a very key part
because right now what's happening is
the IDF and other folks to say hey move
South move down and yet as people have
moved South particularly refugee camps
they've continued to get bombed in
places where they were told to go
because of a commander being somewhere
allegedly or others and so the broadside
is how do you how do you get some
element of trust that where they're
being sent to go is something that's not
not going to end up getting them killed
so I've called for not a ceasefire but a
civilian evacuation I've also called for
not a humanitarian pause just a
temporary sensation but a humanitarian
surge where you don't just bring in the
minimum amount of Aid to Southern Gaza
you bring in the maximum amount to show
the people that if you evacuate if you
move out of the North into the South
you'll not just get a small bit of Aid
you'll get a lot in other words it's
really worth it for you to make this
journey to leave Hamas
behind certain Senators like Senator
Chris Murphy Senator Chris Van Holland
have begun to move and said we need to
have some oversight of how the weapons
that that the United States has now
provided to Israel are being used um the
White House has rejected that thus far
and said we don't want to impose any
limits on those do you think there
should be some limit should I I think
the world looks at the United States as
a Defender uh of Israeli security and
security needs but should there be
constraints on what Israel can do with
our partnership Steve you know
everything I've been calling for in this
debate and in in our conversation uh
today uh preserves innocent life it
fundamentally helps innocent
Palestinians it also helps Israel win it
helps Israel defeat Hamas and I think
that what we what the president has been
trying to do here is stand staunchly by
our Ally our most important Ally in the
Middle East that's that's Israel allow
them to defend their their territory but
help them do so in a way that that is
not only morally successful but
militarily successful as well and I do
think that the president is looking for
ways to exert more influence over the
Israelis to to learn those lessons the
same lessons that I'm that I'm
describing that we learned in Iraq and
Afghanistan one of those probably the
most Paramount being you have to explain
the endgame you have to have a political
solution to something that is
fundamentally a political iCal problem
you're not you're not just going to
solve this by military means that means
being able to explain to the
Palestinians what their future is it
also means by the way nyah's got to be
able to explain to his troops what
they're fighting for because I think his
soldiers know that if they just go into
Gaza and leave it a smoldering mess at
the end of the day they're going to be
right back where they started well
that's a Forever War so are we looking
at the ingredients today of a Forever
War right now on the ground we have the
ingredients of a for ever war and that's
not a recipe that any of us want so I
think that for Israel's success well
that's also the recipe where a a a a dad
a mother cannot go out and justify and
think about why their child was killed
battling in that if you have a Forever
War Without
End you know we don't want any innocent
5-year-old Palestinian kids dying in
this conflict we also don't want
innocent 5y old Israelis dying in this
same conflict 20 years from now when
they're still fighting it I'm just
interested with you have such Insight
what does this do in terms of trauma for
the Israeli Nation but also for a Goins
and Palestinians who have for decades
been locked in a
vice I I mean Steve I know so many
amazing Americans some of the greatest
Americans I've me ever met in my life
who fought heroically in Iraq and
Afghanistan and are still haunted by it
they made it home but they're
tremendously hobbled by post-traumatic
stress and that's going to be a reality
for Jewish citizens of Israel it's going
to be a
reality for Muslim citizens of Palestine
it is going to be a horrific reality for
everyone who's caught up um in this
conflict and it's one of the reasons why
at the end of the day we all have to be
align for peace I had a guy on the show
recently who said hey President Biden
got 20 trucks of humanitarian relief in
at the beginning of this he says a
low-level State Department staffer can
be counted on to get 20 trucks this is
the president of the United States who
got 20 trucks of relief which is
pathetic I mean I mean part of the
question is is is Joe Biden being made
to look pathetically weak when it comes
to interactions with Israel over this no
I don't think so um I mean uh Israel has
gone through the greatest National
tragedy in its history and President
Biden uh made them significantly delay
their ground assault to try to influence
them on how they' they carry it out I
think this could be a lot worse if not
for president B Biden's involvement
today what do you think the
geopolitical dimensions of this are Seth
um when we talked last we talked about
the Ukraine war in Russia and the
failure of deterrence you worry about
Asia the signals that some of these send
around the world and there are concerns
now that China is is testing the
dashboard of America's attention span
across things is the world sensing
America is distracted sort of off off
its uh game that it can't handle this
many of hot conflicts around the world I
think we're showing the world right now
that we can that we can handle this
number of conflicts but but there are
real risks there are real risks there
are real risks that the conflict in Gaza
expands dramatically into a regional war
in the Middle East there are real risks
that the message that SI Jing ping takes
from from looking at Ukraine is the
Americans aren't going to stick with
their Democratic allies and Putin might
eventually win this war and that means I
can get away with starting a war in the
Pacific over Taiwan so there are real
risks and and for everyone who's quick
to criticize the United States and
different things that we do in different
parts of the world it's also important
to understand that the United States is
is pretty much holding this all together
we're preventing a regional war in the
Middle East with our presence we're
preventing Vladimir Putin from rolling
over Ukraine and rolling right into uh
into a a European war with NATO and
every single day we're sending a message
to SI jingping and China do not invade
Democratic Taiwan don't start World War
II in the Pacific let me ask you about
prime minister Netanyahu if you were to
have a conversation with him about what
an endgame would look like and he's come
out and said that every aspect of Gaz
and security is now going to be in
Israel's hands um
I don't want to just critique prime
minister Netanyahu I want to understand
what's the pathway to getting to
something where both sides can see hope
during a time of Rage really on both
sides can begin looking at something
that looks like a sensible endgame
because somebody's got to begin doing
that what would you counsel him to do in
this moment I would say Mr Prime
Minister I understand how Furious you
are I understand how angry your people
are but the right thing to do for every
Israeli kid the right thing to do for
every Palestinian kid is to find a new
solution a political endgame that both
sides can believe in that both sides
where both sides can find peace and that
means you've got to convince Palestinian
innocent civilians and Israelis as well
that there's a better way I think that's
a two-state solution but it's a
reinvigorated two-state solution it's a
new commitment from a prime minister
who's been fundamentally opposed to a
two-state solution for a long time to
actually make it happen the United
States is no longer looked at by many
Palestinians and also Arabs as a fair
broker in that I've been watching turkey
and and uh uh president erdogan and his
strong support both of Hamas but of the
Palestinian side of the equation
turkey's a NATO Ally of the United
States is there an opportunity there you
could actually reshuffle the traditional
players that have been trying to
negotiate a deal and and try and look at
turkey's better impulse pules as as a a
defender of interests on the Palestinian
side and the United States on the
Israeli side or do we still need to
maintain I what I would call a fiction
that we can be fair to be fair to both
sides well look I think a lot of people
rightly ask Seth I mean how can you just
advocate for a two-state solution when
this hasn't worked for decades I think
one of the things that's changed in the
Middle East is you now have Arab states
places like Saudi Arabia the Gulf States
that actually want to have dialogue with
Israel I mean Israel has been pursuing
peace
uh with his Arab neighbors let's turn
that into action let's turn these
agreements into real differences on the
ground I think that if Israel finds a
way with our help to get Arab States
involved in a two-state solution
ultimately ensuring its success that's
more believable for everybody
Congressman Seth Molton of Massachusetts
thank you so much for joining us today
and sharing your candid views thank you
thank you Steve so what's the bottom
line grievance es Drive rage and rage
drives killing and the demonization of
the other the latest bout of Rage
between Israelis and Palestinians was
triggered by Hamas surprise attack on
Israeli military and civilian targets
but history just didn't start on October
7th in Justice for Palestinians has been
simmering for many decades and combined
with deep polarization within Israel
there were many factors that led to this
explosive situation now rage is gushing
and my guest today a former soldier with
experience says that leaders need to be
leaders they need to see through the
rage they need to find ways to
articulate this for their citizens an
endgame a reasonable even if painful
equilibrium that gives both societies a
chance to reset it's almost impossible
to talk about a peaceful future now but
it's a vital part of leadership that's
something that Palestinians Israelis
Americans everybody desperately needs
and that's the bottom
line
[Music]